Handouts/src/handout.md, before:

---
title: UCL Research Data Policy
author: Daniel van Strien

---

## Introduction

With the growth of electronic data resulting from research, the desire for funders to get maximum benefit from their spending and a general shift to open scholarly practices research data management has become an increasingly important issue for researchers at all stages of their research career. The UCL research data management policy[^1]intends to help researchers effectively manage their research data. 


# What is research data?

The UCL Research Data Management policy defines research data as:

> 'facts, observations or experiences on which an argument or theory is constructed or tested. Data may
be numerical, descriptive, aural or visual. Data may be raw, abstracted or analysed, experimental or
observational. Data include but are not limited to: laboratory notebooks; field notebooks; primary research data
(including research data in hardcopy or in computer readable form); questionnaires; audiotapes; videotapes;
models; photographs; films; test responses. Research collections may include slides; artefacts; specimens;
samples.'[^2] 

In the Faculty of Engineering Sciences at UCL research data will incorporate a broad range of different types of material. Some of this may be data commonly found in other disciplines, whilst other data will very specific to a particular research project.   

The EPSRC give the following definition of Research Data:
> 'Recorded, factual material commonly retained by and accepted in the [research] community as necessary to validate research findings; although the majority of such data is created in digital format, all research data is included irrespective of the format in which it is created.'
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC)

# What is research data management? 

Research data management can be described as:

>'an active process by which digital resources remain discoverable, accessible and intelligible over the longer term, a process that invests data and datasets with potential to accrue value as assets enjoying far wider us than their creators may have anticipated. In the world of research, such a value-adding process is a significant contributor to the much desired achievement of impact'. [^3]

# The UCL Research Data Management policy 

The UCL Research Data Management policy aims to

> 'provide a framework to define the responsibilities of all UCL members and to guide researchers and students in how to manage the data, enabling research data to be maintained and preserved as a first class research object and made available to widest possible audience for the highest possible impact’

The UCL policy does this by outlining a range of expectations for researchers in particular forming a Research Data Management Plan (discussed below). 

# Why make the effort? 

The above requirements may appear to place a burden on researchers so it is important to outline some of the benefits the policy intends to achieve. 


## You have to manage research data in the process of carrying out research

In the process of most research research you will produce data. This data could be minimal and in straight forward formats, or it could be large and in complex formats. Regardless this data needs to managed. 

An important reason to consider your research data management needs is to avoid data loss and corruption. Major episodes of data loss can be disruptive to a research project and in worst case scenarios can end a research project. 

However it is important to consider research data management beyond backing up data during the research process. It is also important you consider other issues such as how you will collect data, what formats data will be stored in, how to document your methods and how to potentially share your data most effectively. 

## Funder requirements 

Increasingly funders are introducing requirements around research data management. Following the UCL Research Data Management policy will help you with the following.


**Complying** with funder requirements. If you are funded by the EPSRC and publish a paper there is already an expectation that the related data will be made available where appropriate. Other funders have a variety of expectations but following the UCL policy will help you comply with the majority of these policies. 


**Apply** for research funding: because many research data funders are placing an increased importance on research data management and sharing, considering these issues before you apply will help you in developing funding proposals and demonstrate to researchers that your research will have the maximum possible impact. 


**Share** your research: many research funders are asking researchers to share the research data which supports their publications. I will return to the concerns about sharing in a moment but if you are required to share your research data the UCL policy will help ensure this is done effectively. 

[EPSRC policy framework on research data](https://www.epsrc.ac.uk/about/standards/researchdata/)

## Open Science 

Research data management, and in particular, the sharing of research data is part of a broader shift to 'openness' in scholarly research and publishing practices. Sharing research data has a number of benefits to researchers. 

**Citations** have been shown to be higher when the underlying study is exposed. TODO 






# Further support 

[Delivering a Culture of Wisdom - The 2011 UCL Research Strategy](http://www.ucl.ac.uk/research/vision-strategy)

## Particular issues for the Engineering and Physical Sciences Faculty

## Funder policies

[EPSRC policy framework on research data](https://www.epsrc.ac.uk/about/standards/researchdata/)

## Software Sustainability Institue 
TODO description of SSI 

[How does software fit into EPSRC’s research data policy?,  Neil Chue Hong, Software Sustainability Institute](https://www.software.ac.uk/resources/guides/epsrc-research-data-policy-and-software)

[Choosing an open-source licence, Neil Chue Hong and Tim Parkinson, Software Sustainability Institute](https://www.software.ac.uk/resources/guides/adopting-open-source-licence)

[^1]:[http://www.ucl.ac.uk/isd/services/research-it/documents/uclresearchdatapolicy.pdf]()
[^2]:
UCL Research Data Policy, Paul Ayris, (2013), p.2
[^3]: Pryor, G., 2012. Preface. *Managing research data*, vii. 
[^4]: UCL Research Data Policy, p.4

Commit message:

Add open science and potential issues section

Handouts/src/handout.md, after:

---
title: UCL Research Data Policy
author: Daniel van Strien

---

## Introduction

With the growth of electronic data resulting from research, the desire for funders to get maximum benefit from their spending and a general shift to open scholarly practices research data management has become an increasingly important issue for researchers at all stages of their research career. The UCL research data management policy[^1]intends to help researchers effectively manage their research data. 


# What is research data?

The UCL Research Data Management policy defines research data as:

> 'facts, observations or experiences on which an argument or theory is constructed or tested. Data may
be numerical, descriptive, aural or visual. Data may be raw, abstracted or analysed, experimental or
observational. Data include but are not limited to: laboratory notebooks; field notebooks; primary research data
(including research data in hardcopy or in computer readable form); questionnaires; audiotapes; videotapes;
models; photographs; films; test responses. Research collections may include slides; artefacts; specimens;
samples.'[^2] 

In the Faculty of Engineering Sciences at UCL research data will incorporate a broad range of different types of material. Some of this may be data commonly found in other disciplines, whilst other data will very specific to a particular research project.   

The EPSRC give the following definition of Research Data:
> 'Recorded, factual material commonly retained by and accepted in the [research] community as necessary to validate research findings; although the majority of such data is created in digital format, all research data is included irrespective of the format in which it is created.'
Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC)

# What is research data management? 

Research data management can be described as:

>'an active process by which digital resources remain discoverable, accessible and intelligible over the longer term, a process that invests data and datasets with potential to accrue value as assets enjoying far wider us than their creators may have anticipated. In the world of research, such a value-adding process is a significant contributor to the much desired achievement of impact'. [^3]

# The UCL Research Data Management policy 

The UCL Research Data Management policy aims to

> 'provide a framework to define the responsibilities of all UCL members and to guide researchers and students in how to manage the data, enabling research data to be maintained and preserved as a first class research object and made available to widest possible audience for the highest possible impact’

The UCL policy does this by outlining a range of expectations for researchers in particular forming a Research Data Management Plan (discussed below). 

# Why make the effort? 

The above requirements may appear to place a burden on researchers so it is important to outline some of the benefits the policy intends to achieve. 


## You have to manage research data in the process of carrying out research

In the process of most research research you will produce data. This data could be minimal and in straight forward formats, or it could be large and in complex formats. Regardless this data needs to managed. 

An important reason to consider your research data management needs is to avoid data loss and corruption. Major episodes of data loss can be disruptive to a research project and in worst case scenarios can end a research project. 

However it is important to consider research data management beyond backing up data during the research process. It is also important you consider other issues such as how you will collect data, what formats data will be stored in, how to document your methods and how to potentially share your data most effectively. 

## Funder requirements 

Increasingly funders are introducing requirements around research data management. Following the UCL Research Data Management policy will help you with the following.


**Complying** with funder requirements. If you are funded by the EPSRC and publish a paper there is already an expectation that the related data will be made available where appropriate. Other funders have a variety of expectations but following the UCL policy will help you comply with the majority of these policies. 


**Apply** for research funding: because many research data funders are placing an increased importance on research data management and sharing, considering these issues before you apply will help you in developing funding proposals and demonstrate to researchers that your research will have the maximum possible impact. 


**Share** your research: many research funders are asking researchers to share the research data which supports their publications. I will return to the concerns about sharing in a moment but if you are required to share your research data the UCL policy will help ensure this is done effectively. 

[EPSRC policy framework on research data](https://www.epsrc.ac.uk/about/standards/researchdata/)

## Open Science 

Research data management, and in particular, the sharing of research data is part of a broader shift to 'openness' in scholarly research and publishing practices. Sharing research data has a number of benefits to researchers. 

A number of studies have found that authors who publish the underlying data receive higher **citations** for their research. The increase varies across in different studies and disciplines but is always positive. 

Making your underlying data available will increase the **reproducibility** of your research. Other researchers will be able to interrogate your data, verify your methods and confirm or disprove your findings. This may be welcomed with some trepidation but ultimately this helps increase academic rigour.

**Sharing** research data offers particularly exciting possibilities. Your data may be used for other projects, combined with other data, or be expanded upon. Sometimes this will be to carry out a similar project, helping you verify your findings, whilst other times the research may use your data for a very different kind of project. Following the UCL Research Data Management policy will help ensure your data is citable. As Open Science approaches become more widespread data sharing will begin to be more fully recognised as a scholarly contribution. 

# Barriers to good Research Data Management  

Responses to common issues are discussed below. More support can be found at the end of this document. 

## I am worried about Intellectual Property 



## My data is not useful for others

Sometimes researchers think that their data is too specific to their project to be useful for others. Although this may sometimes be true exposing your data still comes with the other benefits discussed above, and is still often required by funders. It is also difficult to anticipate how your data may be used. Researchers may find it useful for something you hadn't anticipated. The growth of text and data mining in particular may mean your data is used as part of a much bigger collection of data. 

Sometimes this concern is related to the difficulty of understanding the data. This does not necessarily have to be a concern. Making your data available publicly does not mean that everyone is going to be able to understand your research. It is likely that the majority of people making use of your data will be other researchers in your discipline or a closely related one. However sometimes this concern relates more to 'messy data'. Although this can be an issue with any project, trying to implement good Research Data Management plans before beginning your project will help you ensure your data is well organised and documented. 

## I don't know enough about Research Data Management 

You do not have to become an expert in Research Data Management. The Research Data Service at UCL exists to provide support to researchers. These services include helping researchers develop research data management plans, data storage during your research project, and offering support on long term storage (a UCL data archive is currently being piloted). More resources are highlighted below. 

# Further support 

[Delivering a Culture of Wisdom - The 2011 UCL Research Strategy](http://www.ucl.ac.uk/research/vision-strategy)

## Particular issues for the Engineering and Physical Sciences Faculty

## Funder policies

[EPSRC policy framework on research data](https://www.epsrc.ac.uk/about/standards/researchdata/)

## Software Sustainability Institue 
TODO description of SSI 

[How does software fit into EPSRC’s research data policy?,  Neil Chue Hong, Software Sustainability Institute](https://www.software.ac.uk/resources/guides/epsrc-research-data-policy-and-software)

[Choosing an open-source licence, Neil Chue Hong and Tim Parkinson, Software Sustainability Institute](https://www.software.ac.uk/resources/guides/adopting-open-source-licence)

[^1]:[http://www.ucl.ac.uk/isd/services/research-it/documents/uclresearchdatapolicy.pdf]()
[^2]:
UCL Research Data Policy, Paul Ayris, (2013), p.2
[^3]: Pryor, G., 2012. Preface. *Managing research data*, vii. 
[^4]: UCL Research Data Policy, p.4
